[Music]
good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to begin looking at irrationality in
mathematics it's a major problem with the subject
our approach to irrationality doesn't work most
senior mathematicians are aware of this at some
level but they would rather not address the issue
and acknowledge it many junior mathematicians
and most students are blissfully unaware of the
problems nevertheless the problems are serious
they're deep they affect so many things they
weaken mathematics and they make it much less
beautiful than it ought to be it's a big subject
so where to start slowly slowly today we look at
historically the first example of irrationality
which concerns this idea of the square root of
two the question is there a number whose square
is two as the pythagoreans realized this comes
up naturally in geometry because the ratio of
the side of a square to the diagonal of a square
is exactly this kind of thing so the pythagoreans
actually realized that there was no such number
and it caused them a lot of consternation but
that difficulty has extended and extends even
now today casting a long shadow over many parts
of mathematics one of the challenges in talking
about this is that in conveniently there's not
just one square root of two that's floating out
there there are in fact three different square
root of twos in quotes which are found today in
mathematics and two of them are perfectly fine
make complete sense can be established without any
doubts or ambiguity while the third simply doesn't
work and represents a severe confusion and maybe
some dishonesty as well so there is an applied
approach to the square root of two there is an
algebraic approach to the square root of two and
there is an analytic approach to the square root
of two these are all quite separate even though
we're using the same symbols so it's easy to get a
little bit mixed up in these discussions so one of
our jobs is to clearly differentiate between
these different approaches in order to point
out that this one which is the most popular one
and the one that most people ascribe to does the
work okay so analysis modern analysis is a very
weak subject logically and the the origins of
the problem are already contained in this square
root of 2 ok so the problem historically goes back
to the ancient Greeks who who appreciated the
importance this conundrum of the square root of
2 and it's also the really the first example
I suppose of an irrational number which was
incorporated into mathematics in the modern sense
by 7 in the 16th century he introduced the idea
that the decimal number system of the Hindus
could be extended to capture things like the
square root of 2 or pi or E or other so-called
real numbers all right there were very serious
problems with this decimal system approach we're
going to talk at length about them but today we're
going to focus on the square root of 2 and a good
place to start is to go back to the pythagoreans
in the early days of Greek mathematics so around
500 600 BC the arithmetic and the geometry were
of a relatively primitive kind they were still
not comparable in in depth to the Babylonians
or the Egyptians from which they learnt a lot
of their mathematics nevertheless they made one
very remarkable accomplishment having exactly to
do with this question of the irrationality of the
diagonal of a square or this root 2 so what we're
talking about here is the pythagoreans followers
of pythagoras and and their understanding that
the side and diagonal of a square were in commence
herbal and it all comes down to Pythagoras theorem
which is of course the most important theorem in
mathematics let me remind you how the ancient
Greeks thought about this and you can also go
back to the earlier videos in this series to get
some more information so we have a right triangle
here meaning that this side and this side are
perpendicular then we can create squares on each
of the three sides and supposing that we have a
notion of area we can talk about the area of this
square let's call it q1 the area of this square q2
the area of this square q3 and Pythagoras theorem
is that q1 plus q2 equals q3 so if we have a
perpendicular sides there then this relation
between the areas wholes now a special case of
that is the case of a isosceles right triangle
which is something like this where this side and
this side are congruent and you can think of this
as just being half of a square I haven't drawn the
other part of the square we really have a square
here and that's really the diagonal of a square
in this case this area well I prefer to call it
quadrants this quadrants Q 1 and this quadrants
Q 1 are equal then Pythagoras theorem is that Q
1 plus Q 1 equals Q 3 or 2 times Q 1 equals Q
3 so far there's no problem it's all well and
good the problem arises when we try to interpret
area in terms of distance in other words when we
take the square root of Q 1 when we say that
this area is actually this length times this
length we have a square here so when we try to
convert quadrants q1 to distance or length the
problem arises this area is d 1 times D 1 or D
1 squared so this relation becomes 2 D 1 squared
equals Q 3 which is this D 3 times this D 3 so D 3
squared and then if you rewrite this as 2 equals D
3 over D 1 all squared you see that you've written
2 as a square a square of this number which is the
ratio of D 3 to D 1 now the ancient Greeks did not
think in terms of numbers they thought of segments
as being sort of fundamental objects themselves
this idea that we should associate a length to a
segment is a modern idea not one that the ancient
Greeks supported so they wouldn't have exactly
said it this way but nevertheless they realized
that if you were just simply interested in the
relationship between this segment and
this segment that involves some basic
incommensurability because at some point they
realized that this kind of thing was impossible
it was impossible if d3 and d1 were commensurate
in other words if this was a rational ratio or
in other words a rational number we would say
today so assuming that the ratio of this length
to this length is a rational number leads
to a contradiction because they proved that
it was impossible for two to be the square
of a rational number let's have a look at
this very important discovery so here's the
theorem that is at the heart of the problem
the theorem is that there is no rational number
a over B satisfying a over B squared equals 2
so this result was known to the pythagoreans and
it was found in earlier editions of Euclid in book
10 I believe this theorem is deeply upsetting
to the Pythagorean okay so suppose that a and
B are integers that's what we mean when we have
a rational number and if they're integers let's
suppose that they have no common factor because if
they do have a common factor we can divide by that
common factor both of them to get a new pair of
integers which don't have that common factor so by
canceling any common factors we can get these the
numerator and the denominator in sort of reduced
form so we're gonna assume that we've already done
that that's an important step in the argument okay
then we look at this equation and we rewrite it
as a squared equals 2 times B squared these are
all integers in fact they're natural numbers this
is obviously even because it's 2 times something
and so a has to be even because the square of an
odd number is odd so a must be even and if you're
an even number then it means you're two times
some other number so a is equal to two times
some other number C okay now we plug to C and for
a in this expression and then when we square it we
get a four here so the four and the two cancel
partially leaving us with a two on this side
now we get to C squared equals B squared and now
we can conclude exactly the same way that B must
be even because this is obviously even B can't be
odd because the square of an odd number is an odd
number so B must be even so we've concluded
that a is even and B is even so they have a
common factor of two and that's contrary to our
assumption we assumed we had already cancelled any
common factors including two so our assumption
that this is possible is incorrect there is no
rational number a over B whose square is equal
to two and four the pythagoreans that meant
that the diagonal of a square and the side of a
square were in commence herbal so it meant that
you couldn't go from the side of a square to the
diagonal square by equal subdivisions or by equal
repetitions so basic in commencer ability between
these two things because the ratio is not rational
so there's very important theorem and it's really
the heart and the start of irrationality issues in
mathematics the result that we've just proven is
often restated in a very wrong way so it is very
wrong to restate what we've just proven in the
following way to say that the number square root
of 2 is irrational this is often done you often
see this ok no no what the theorem really says is
that there is no number square root of 2 there is
no number whose square is 2 this way of writing it
suggests that you already have an object square
root of 2 and now you're looking at it saying
oh we've just shown that this is actually not
rational no what you have is you don't even have
the square root of 2 you don't have such an object
yet that's what the theorem is telling us there is
no square root of 2 to decide oh I wonder whether
this is rational or not rational there are only
rational numbers and there is no rational number
whose square is 2 so to even write square root
of 2 is already at some level some kind of cheat
it's contradicting what we've just demonstrated
namely that you can't write such a thing ok now
as I've mentioned there are currently three ways
to try to overcome this difficulty there's an
applied approach an algebraic approach an analytic
approach the applied approach is to say let's just
work with approximations although we cannot find a
number a rational number whose square is 2 we can
find rational numbers whose square is pretty close
to 2 and for many purposes that's good enough
that's an applied approach there's an algebraic
approach which is to define an extension field of
the rational numbers we're going to enlarge our
notion of number to include some new strange
object which we've created expressly to have
the property that it's square is 2 it's a little
bit tricky to do that require some care but it's
remarkable that that can be done then there's the
analytic approach which essentially goes back to
7 which is to say let's use infinite decimals
and probably I should put that in quotes let's
use infinite decimals or something equivalent
to create square root of 2 as a real number ok
lots of quotes everywhere here so this is this is
the modern idea and it's very highly problematic
very highly problematic it doesn't work in it
to be honest doesn't even come close to working
so let's have a look one at a time at these 3
different approaches the first one the applied
approach which is the one that's actually used
by applied mathematicians by engineers and by
scientists even though they may not be completely
conscious of having this sort of separate approach
to things the idea here is that the square root of
2 which we'll might call R here this thing refers
to a rational number which has the property that R
squared is approximately 2 so we're looking for a
rational number whose square is pretty close to 2
and pretty close is open to interpretation pretty
close might depend on the particular application
we have in mind in any case once we found such
a are will say that that R is equal to root 2 so
we'll write R equals root 2 even though in fact it
doesn't exactly have the property that it's square
is 2 because but it's good enough it has the
property that square is almost 2 so for example
1.4 squared is 1.96 that's pretty close to to
1.5 squared is 2.25 that's also pretty close to 2
and this one's a little bit smaller and this one's
a little bit bigger so we're kind of bracketing
to a little bit more accurately suppose we look
at one point 4 1 well it's square is 1 point 9
8 8 1 while one point 4 2 squared is 2 point 0
1 6 for both of these numbers one point 4 1 or
1 point 4 2 are therefore possible approximate
values for the square root of 2 this one being a
little bit too small this one being a little bit
too big well we can do better we can look at one
point 4 1 4 squared which has this value 1 point
4 1 5 squared which has exactly this value and
we're getting closer and closer to 2 even though
we're not finding a rational number whose square
is exactly 2 1.4142 there's it's square 1 point
4 1 4 3 there's it's square 1.4142 1 there's its
square 1.4142 2 there is it square so for example
if an applied mathematician needed a number that
was approximately the square root of 2 they could
use 1 point 4 which would be rather crude they
could use 1 point 4 1 or 1 point 4 2 or maybe
go to 1 point 4 1 4 or 1 point 4 1 4 2 1 even
a little bit more accurate so this thing here
could be written as the square root of 2 which
is not exactly true but it's approximately true
so this idea of look for approximate solutions is
both practical and important theoretically there
are many situations where some number or some
object or some construction cannot be defined
or obtained precisely but an approximation can
be obtained this is just like the real world I
mean there's many situations where some ideal is
not obtainable but we can go some ways towards the
ideal and that's a value let's have a look at an
application that's in line with what we've been
talking about this is sort of in the spirit of
this particular video which discusses this kind
of distinction between pure and applied between
accuracy and approximation a greater length
so have a look at that one Universal hyperbolic
geometry xx let's have a look in this example here
at the Fermat curve which is another interesting
cubic with equation X cubed plus y cubed equals
1 here's a graph of asymptotic that line there
it goes through the point 1 0 and the point 0
1 and firma in fact prove that the only rational
points on this curve are 1 0 0 1 which is to say
that the only points on the curve are 1 0 0 1
so you might well ask well what exactly are we
plotting here if these are the only two points
why don't we just have two points as the plot
well the reason is because we're plotting this
thing approximately and that's a very useful
thing to be able to do in other words what we
are plotting is we're plotting points x and y
in the plane for which x cubed plus y cubed minus
1 is close to 0 not necessarily 0 but say close
to 0 and close to 0 might mean different things
it might mean between minus point 1 and point 1
or it might mean between minus point 0 0 0 0 1
and plus point 0:01 it depends but once we allow
some range of values near zero instead of just
exactly zero then there are lots of points that we
can find and we can plot some number of them and
played join the dots to get a graph and that's in
fact what your computer does your computer does
not look for numbers for which this is exactly
true it only looks for decimal numbers for which
this is approximately true so this is what your
computer is doing it's a useful thing to be able
to do thinking approximately rather than exactly
has many applications and in some sense it's
actually the heart of the key idea of analysis
where analysis starts the idea that we're going to
work with things approximately but we're going to
keep control over how much error we've introduced
this idea also influences what we mean by solving
an equation for example suppose we want to solve
the equation x squared equals K where K is some
fixed number in fact the problem has three cases
not two as you might think the three cases are
that first of all a solution might exist for
example if you have x squared equals 25 over
9 then a solution does exist x equals 5 over 3 is
a solution and in fact x equals -5 over 3 is also
a solution or say here if you look at x squared
equals 4 what we're looking for is we're looking
for a value of x down here for which the value of
the graph is at this level at y equals 4 so we're
looking where the graph of x squared meets this
horizontal line when y equals 4 well there's exact
solutions 2 and minus 2 case number 2 is where
there's no solution but approximate solutions do
exist for example X grade equals 2 in that case
X is approximately say plus or minus 1 point 4 1
4 there are no rational numbers that solve this
thing exactly but there are numbers that solve
it pretty close which is to say that if we draw
a horizontal line through 2 it in fact does not
actually meet this graph but there are points
on the graph which come pretty close to meeting
it there's no same thing here for K equals 3 for
example these points don't officially exist but
they approximately exist there's lots of points in
here that are approximately having the value that
x squared equals 3 and the third case no solution
exists not even an approximate one for example x
squared equals minus 3 or x squared equals minus
1 pictured here there's no value of x for which
the value x squared is even close to minus 1 I
think it's quite useful to think about given an
equation there are these three possibilities
an exact solution an approximate solution or
no solution many times the approximate solution
is what we're ending up graphing on the page now
let me introduce to you this algebraic approach
to the square root of 2 it's a very interesting
idea and is a very important idea in mathematics
will be very useful to us so the idea is to start
from the rational numbers and to enlarge the
rational numbers to create a slightly bigger
arena for doing arithmetic in which there is an
object which is playing the role of a square root
of 2 algebraically so here's how this is done and
this is just a preview of it we're going to talk
at length about this construction and similar
constructions later on all right so the new
bigger field that we might be considering here
we might call it R at square root of 2 and the
objects are pairs of rational numbers so we're
gonna consider pairs a and B a and B are rational
numbers and we use round brackets the operations
are the following addition as attraction are just
component wise so they're just like they would
be if we thinking of these as vectors and it's
useful to think of them as just factors so those
vectors with the ordinary addition and subtraction
and here's the crucial new operation we're going
to find a multiplication of these two vectors so
a 1 B 1 times a 2 B 2 is by definition you're
just how we're gonna define it a 1 times a 2
plus 2 times B 1 B 2 that's the first component
and the second component is a 1 B 2 plus a 2 B
1 okay it looks like we'll just pull this out of
the hat but in fact there is some very good reason
for exactly this choice and I'm gonna leave you
with some exercises you can play around with the
arithmetic here okay so you can convince yourself
that this particular object 1 0 plays sort of the
role of the number 1 if you take 1 0 times any
vector you get 2 vector well you can check for
example that this multiplication is commutative if
you interchange the order you get the same thing
and here a little bit more subtle thing you can
check that if you take some vector a B and you
multiply it by this particular vector you get 1
0 and this vector has components a over a squared
minus 2 B squared and minus B over a squared minus
2 B squared okay do we have to worry about this
thing being 0 well how could this be 0 if this
is 0 it would mean that a squared over B squared
equals 2 you know is that a be all squared was 2
and we know that that's not possible so it's not
to worry there's never a possibility that the
denominator here is zero so this this inverse
we're really finding the inverse of this vector
because the product is equal to the one in the
field and then you can check that zero one squared
this this other unit element has the property that
it's square is two and that justifies calling
it introducing a new symbol by calling this
thing root two and then we can go back to what
we started with and rewrite it by saying our way
we can now rewrite this and sort of informally
introduce this notation a plus B root two all
right and then more laborious exercise you can
and what fun is to check that the usual laws
of arithmetic hold for these operations so a
distributive law associative law etc so this
is a new arena of arithmetic which is expressly
created in order that it has an object which
plays the role of a root two but it's important
to note that this root two that's appearing here
has nothing whatsoever to do with that one point
four one four etcetera that we were talking about
previously completely unrelated to that decimal
this root two is floating freely away from the
rational numbers it's all on its own nevertheless
is very powerful and important construction we're
gonna have to talk more about this algebraic
approach to extension fields so most of you
watching this series will probably not think about
square root of two as an approximation and you
will probably not think about it in terms of some
algebraic construction in your mind you will think
that square root of two is some infinite decimal
which starts out one point four one four and goes
on in some fashion that's the third approach
that's the analytic approach and that's wrong
thinking so I really want to get you to consider
the possibility that that is an incorrect thought
that you are sorely mistaken in thinking that the
such an object exists it does not exist my friends
okay and mathematics becomes a lot stronger when
we look carefully at that situation in that claim
and examine it logically dispassionately I
know there's thousands of mathematicians out
there who routinely write down route to and
imagine it as an infinite decimal every day
but they're all wrong they are seriously wrong
so okay let's try to slowly take a big breath
and consider this possibility that we might have
to change our point of view let's have a look at
this analytic approach to route 2 which pretends
that somewhere on the line which up till now only
consists of rational numbers somewhere there's
a new place and it's somewhere between 1 & 2 and
there's a new number called route 2 and it has the
property that it's square is 2 and we can find out
what this thing is by making a calculation in
fact we can go back exactly to the algorithm of
finding a square root that goes back to the Hindus
that we discussed in math foundations 49 in that
video I showed you how to find the square root
of a number an integer which we already knew was
a square but it's not too hard to see that the
same algorithm also works for decimal numbers
and what it turns out is something that we haven't
seen before a new kind of object so let's have a
look at that algorithm we want to find the square
root of 2 so we're going to write 2 as 2.00 and
here are all the subsequent zeros in the decimal
expansion of course there are necessary but we'll
put them there and we'll separate them in pairs
with with commas so what is the algorithm say
the algorithm says well first of all we should
find a number whose the square fits inside too
so say what so 1 squared is 1 and if we take the
difference between 2 and 1 we get 1 and then we
pull down a pair of these two zeros and get 1
point 0 0 the point here is not too important
you can think of this as being a hundred if you
like and ignore the decimal doesn't make much
difference now what we do is we take what we've
just got here that one and we multiplied by two
and put it there and we write a little blank and
we then look for the next number which is going to
also fit into that blank and has the property then
when when we take this times this combination we
get something that's close to what we've got there
but just a little bit less so I think of this is
a hundred then if we put a 4 here then we get 4
times 24 is 96 which is just a little bit less
than 103 would also work by 3 is not the maximum
5 would be too much because 5 times 25 would be
more than a hundred so 4 is the right one we'll
multiply by 24 to get 96 and then we'll take the
difference for just before bring down another two
zeros now we take the one point 4 multiplied by 2
ok 28 I haven't put a little decimal point here
I could put a decimal point in here but I won't
so 28 and then we need to find this number here
so that if we copy it over here and multiply this
times this we get something that's just under
400 so one will work one times two hundred and
eighty one is 281 two would be too much because
we would get something like 56 560 so that's a
one get 281 take the difference one one nine pull
down two more zeros multiply this by two 282 leave
a blank figure out what number we have to put in
here four times this turns out to be this which
is just a little bit under one one nine zero zero
there's the difference take what we've got so far
x to leave a blank find a number here such that
when we put it here then this times this is just
a little bit less than this we do that and keep
going there's nothing to prevent us from carrying
on and we can do so well we can do so until
our patience runs out or we fall over or or
something stops us but in theory we could keep
going further and further and further in this
algorithm completely straight forward so this is
now a grid that just keeps on going and going it
gets harder and harder as we go because at each
step we have to take what we've already obtained
and multiplied by two and then add another digit
so the numbers involved are getting bigger and
bigger and bigger there's nothing we can do about
that so after we've gone a trillion places here
then we're taking this number with a trillion
places and multiplying it by two to get the next
step so necessarily the program will slow down and
slow down it will get slower and slower because it
has to deal with these larger and larger numbers
at any point we can stop and say we've got a good
approximation to a number that whose square is two
but at no point do we actually finish this process
it just keeps on going and keeps on going and
keeps on going and there's no appreciably faster
way ok there's no much fancier way of computing
a square root than essentially doing this now
people have done this to several million places
found square root of two but it's it's a bit of
hard work so what do we end up getting from
this well we get something like this we get
a statement that the square root of two equals
one point four one four two one three five six
two three seven three zero nine five zero four
eight eight zero one six eight eight seven two
four two zero nine six nine eight zero seven
eight five six nine six seven one eight seven
five three seven six nine four eight zero seven
three one seven six six seven nine seven three
seven nine nine zero seven three two four seven
eight four six two one zero seven zero three eight
eight five zero three eight seven five three four
three two seven six four one five seven and so on
and that's the kind of statement that modern
analysis makes and modern analysis claims that
we have now found square root of two and there
it is well usually they don't list as many as
I just have there's usually five or ten listed
but of course as I've mentioned it's possible to
list many more because millions of these digits
are known so is this a correct and meaningful
statement does it make sense to say that the
square root of two equals this no it does not
make sense this is not a correct and meaningful
statement why not well because the three dots
at the end incorporates all kinds of additional
stuff that has not been done we have not finished
the job we have not found a square root of two in
fact all what we've done by proceeding up to this
point is found a reasonably decent approximation
to the square root of two we have not found the
square root of two and no matter how much effort
and time and energy you put in you will still be
in a similar position it is impossible for us
to finish the task it is impossible for us to
finish and say ha now I have the square root
of two of course we do this all the time we
pretend that we have the square root of two
it's a dishonesty in godsgarden should there
be such a thing which might be far outside our
universe it may very well be that there's a beauty
full infinite stone on which all the digits of
square root of two appear where this thing is
written out it's in its entirety which goes
on forever God possibly has the potential of
understanding this thing in its entirety but
here we human beings in this universe do not
have this potential we are not at the level of
God it is wrong for us to have such an arrogant
approach to say we can do the same thing that
God can we can understand this number we cannot
understand this number it's wrong even to say I
can imagine this number you cannot imagine this
number you cannot imagine something that goes
on truly forever despite with you or any one
may claim you can imagine something going on for
a very very long time but you can only imagine
that you can imagine the entire sequence you can't
actually imagine the entire sequence so there is
serious dishonesty here in this statement this is
not a mathematically correct statement if you're
remarking this statement you would have to mark
it zero out of one it's just not true of course
many of you be so used to making this statement
so used to the idea that analysis understands
the square root of two you will be loath to admit
any weakness in this direction but consider for
a minute suppose that we buy for a second that
this really is the square root of two suppose
we accept these little three dots here as somehow
adequately representing these untold infinities
that that go on what would happen if we reduced
the size here a little bit and chopped a few of
these digits off suppose I remove that seven and
had the three dots emanating from there would that
still be all right probably you will say yes all
right suppose I eliminate that entire row that row
that row that row say all of this row up to the
two so is it still true that root two is 1.4142
dot dot dot perhaps you say yes because perhaps
you've even written something like that okay let
me read you reduce a few more let me chop off a
few more how about root two is one point dot dot
dot now you're probably starting to think well
I'm not sure if I would go for that let me go
one more how about I just eliminate the one
altogether and I just write root two equals
dot dot dot what essential difference is there
root two equals dot dot dot a lot of students
would be very happy with an arithmetic that look
like that got a mathematics question what's the
answer just put dot dot dots mathematics becomes
very easy doesn't it so I claim that there's no
need to be pretending here most analysts are
afraid of the consequences of having to admit
that this doesn't work because they think that
their subject is going to collapse it's not going
to collapse what's going to be required is that
we look at it again with fresh eyes and fix it
but collapse is not really in the cards but some
work is required there's an uphill challenge here
to fix analysis and to replace wofully notions
like this with actually concrete explicit true
statements and a good place to start is to go
back to that approximation point of view the
applied point of view and think a little bit more
clearly about what's going on there and how we can
use ideas of approximation to start thinking about
measurement and analysis next time we're going to
do just that I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman wildberger thanks for listening [Music]